Install batou's requirements on Debian / Ubuntu / Mint
------------------------------------------------------

Depending on you specific distribution, software packages either need to be
installed using ``apt-get`` or ``aptitude``. ``apt-get`` is more specific to
Ubuntu and its derivates, whereas ``aptitude`` is typically used on Debian. In
our examples below, we will stick to ``apt-get``.

.. note:: RPM-based environments are not native for any of the developers and
    not tested systematically. Let us know if any of this information is
    incorrect and we'll gladly update this.

Python 3
~~~~~~~~

In many distributions, Python 3 should ship as the default system Python and
should therefore already be installed. If not, you can install it by executing:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install python3-dev

.. note:: Although installing using ``sudo apt-get install python3`` would be
	sufficient, we choose to ``python3-dev`` because having the additional
	development packages installed does not hurt and may help in situations
	that require functionality that is not included in the base package.

virtualenv
~~~~~~~~~~

virtualenv creates isolated environments for Python, where you can install and
upgrade libraries isolated from the system libraries and other environments on
the system. You can install virtualenv by executing:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install python3-virtualenv

Mercurial
~~~~~~~~~

Mercurial is a distributed source control management tool. You can install
Mercurial by executing:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install mercurial

SSH client
~~~~~~~~~~

The OpenSSH client should ship with nearly any distribution and should already
be installed. If not, you can install it by executing:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install openssh-client

Git
~~~

Git is a distributed revision control and source code management system. You can
install Git by executing:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install git

In some cases you may want more functionality than the basic ``git`` package
offers. To get a list of software packages related to ``git``, execute:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-cache search . | grep ^git

You can then install the respective package with ``apt-get`` like we did for
``git``.

make
~~~~

GNU Make is a tool which controls the generation of executables and other
non-source files of a program from the program's source files. It is typically
available on nearly any Linux distribution.

Since it is heavily involved in self-compiling software, it is advisable to
additionally install a useful set of packages that helps compiling software:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install build-essential

NRPE
~~~~

NRPE is an add-on for Nagios that allows you to execute plugins and commands on
remote Linux/Unix machines. NRPE can be installed by executing:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install nagios-nrpe-server

rsync
~~~~~

rsync is a file synchronization and file transfer program for Unix-like systems.
You can install rsync by executing:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install rsync

Subversion
~~~~~~~~~~

Subversion is a software versioning and revision control system. To install it,
execute:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install subversion

.. note:: Additionally installing the package ``subversion-tools`` may be
	helpful when you need more functionality and helper tools for
	Subversion.

UnZip
~~~~~

UnZip is an extraction utility for archives compressed in .zip format. You can
install it by executing:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install unzip

Tar
~~~

GNU Tar provides the ability to create tar archives, as well as various other
kinds of manipulation. It should already ship with nearly any Linux
distribution. If not, you can install it by executing:

.. code-block:: bash

	sudo apt-get install tar
